02-essentials/01-starting-project/notes.md, before:

# Angular Course

## Section 2 - Angular Essentials

### 17. Managing and Creating Components with Angular CLI

    ng generate component <componentname>

OR short-hand 

    ng g c <componentname 

Example: 

    ng g c user

the above command will generate a component under `app/user/user.component.ts` and similarly `.html` and `.css` and `.spec.ts` for the **automated testing** file

### 21. Outputting Dynamic Content with Interpolation 

String interpolation allows you to render the dynamic data. in Angular, you can render the property of a class in the markup using double curly braces '{{  }}' 

### 22. Property Binding 

String interpolation is typically used between tags like `<h1>{{ selectedUser.name }}</h1>` and not used for *attributes* e.g. `<img src="{{ selectedUser.avatar }}" >`. Although you can use that but there is an alternative called Property Binding.

To configure the property of the DOM element to bind, we wrap the name of the element in double square brackets '[]' and assign the value to that attribute 

    <img [src]="'assets/users/' + selectedUser.avatar">

we can do this 

    <img src="assets/users/{{ selectedUser.avatar }}" alt="{{ selectedUser.name }}"/>

but this is better

    <img [src]="'assets/users/' + selectedUser.avatar" [alt]="selectedUser.name" />


#### Difference between Interpolation and Property Binding

With interpolation, you can do only **string** or **integer** manipulation. It does not deal with values for example *boolean* values. 

Let's take an example: you have a property in the component class which it *disable = false*. now in input tag's attribute **disabled** you pass it as 

    <input disabled="{{ disable }}" /> // this will read it as string and it will be always true

with Property Binding 

    <input [disabled]=disable /> // this will read 'disable' as false

To change the attribute or property, always use the **Property Binding**. 

### 27. How Angular tracks and make the UI changes 

`Zone.js` is a JS library. After every event (user events and others) **zone.js** looks for the changes to be made and updates the UI. When an async task completes, zone.js notifies Angular to run change detection. This ensures the UI updates automatically when data changes. Without zone.js, developers would need to manually trigger change detection.

### 28. Introducing Signals 

Signals are advance method of change detection and UI updates. Signals are Trackable Data Containers.

A Signal is an object that stores a value. Angular manages subscriptions to the signal to get notified about value changes. When a change occurs, Angular is the able to update the part of the UI that needs updating. 

They contains values, and they notify angular when those values change so Angular can update those parts of the UI where these values are being used. 

Whenever you are dealing with any property that stores a signal, you have to execute the property as a function to get the latest value for it. you can not access it like {{ selectUser.name }} rather you have to {{ selectUser().name }}

By using Signal, Angular can implement UI change in a fine grained way. Angular can now just look at specific parts of the app for the UI changes, and not all the possible parts of the application where an event could occur.

**Zone.js** -> notifies Angular about user events, expired timers etc. 
**Singals** -> notify Angular about when a signal values changes. 

### 30. Defining Component Inputs - Making Components Reusable

You can pass the dynamic data to the component, for that define the property in the .ts file with decorator @Input which will be imported from core. And then access this property and set the value of this property with the component tag.

```
export class UserComponent {

    @Input() avatar!: string;
    @Input() name!: string;

    // the '!' with property name is to tell typescript that we are going to set the value of this property from outside and that we know we have not initialized this property with any value.

    // image path getter
    get imagePath() {
        return "assets/users/" + this.avatar;
    }

    // define a function that handles the event (the name of the function may start with 'on')
    onClickUser() { }

}
```

    <app-user [avatar]="users[1].avatar" [name]="users[1].name"/>


### 32. Using Signal Inputs 

```
import { Component, computed, Input, input} from '@angular/core';

@Component({
  selector: 'app-user',
  standalone: true,
  templateUrl: './user.component.html',
  styleUrl: './user.component.css'
})
export class UserComponent {

  // @Input({required: true}) avatar!: string;
  // @Input({required: true}) name!: string;

  // @Input is a decorator 
  // input() is a function

  // setting inputs with input()
  avatar = input.required(); 
  name = input.required(); 

  imagePath = computed(() => {
    return "assets/users/" + this.avatar();
  });
  
  // * we do not need exclamation with the propery name because technically the 'avatar' and 'name' now have initial values assigned to them which are these signal inputs and since the signals are data container they internally hold some value and those internal values will be the actual input values

  // * name and avatar now has become signals and in component we now access these inputs as 'name()' and not 'name'

  // * these input signals are read only, which means that the value of these inputs will only change when the value is given from the component markup. and you can not set the value of these inputs inside the components class where inputs are registered i.e. in .ts file. 
  // * Reason ? since with signals, angular manages subscriptions and track changes and updates UI. so the signal has to be changed from the outside and it will not be efficient if it can be changed from anywhere

  // - avatar = input(); // define an input 
  // - avatar = input(''); // you can pass any initial value to the input 
  // - avatar = input<string>(); // you can define the type of the input 
  // - avatar = input.required(); // you can make it required but then you can not assign any initial value to the input and it has to be passed to the component as attribute
  // - avatar = input.required<string>(); 

  // image path getter
  // get imagePath() {
  //   return "assets/users/" + this.avatar;
  // }

  // define a function that handles the event (the name of the function may start with 'on')
  onClickUser() {
    this.avatar = 'one';
   }

}

```

Majority of the projects does not use signals yet. they mostly use @Input


### 41. Outputting List Content Dynamically in Angular

    <ul id="users">
        @for (user of users; track user.id){
        <li>
            <app-user
            [user]="user"
            (select)="onSelectUser($event)"
            />
        </li>
        }
    </ul>

The reason behind the `track user.id` is that the Angular wants to assign something unique to each element of the list, and the other thing is because of efficiency. For example, if there is change in list of items, the Angular won't have to generate the whole list again and again. So, that's the idea behind the track use.id 

### 43. Legacy Angular: Using ngFor & ngIf

``` 
Newer version:

<ul id="users">
    @for (user of users; track user.id){
      <li>
        <app-user
          [user]="user"
          (select)="onSelectUser($event)"
        />
      </li>
    }
  </ul>
```

```
Legacy with *ngFor:

<ul id="users">
      <li *ngFor="let user of users">
        <app-user
          [user]="user"
          (select)="onSelectUser($event)"
        />
      </li>
  </ul>
```

`*ngFor` is type of **Structual Directive** which is an enhancement that is added to elements to change those elements or change the DOM where those elements are used.

And now for `@if` is `ngIf`

```
Newer version:
@if(getSelectedUser){
    <app-tasks [name]="getSelectedUser.name" />
  } @else {
    <p id="fallback">Ssssssssssss</p>
  }
```

```
Legacy:
<app-tasks *ngIf="selectedUser; else anyfallback" [name]="selectedUser.name" />

<!--- this is else case --->
    <ng-template #anyfallback>
      <p id="fallback">Ssssssssssss</p>
    </ng-template>
```
`else` case is a bit complex.

Note: Make sure to import the NgFor and NgIf in .ts file


### 43. More Component Communication: Deleting Tasks

Flow of event, in `task.html` file, listen for the click event on the complete button, link a function `onCompleteTask()` to this click event and in this function, emit an output event. Then in the `tasks.html` file, listen for this new event and link that event to a function in `tasks.ts` file.

### 52. Using Directives & Two-Way-Binding

`[(ngModel)]` is a directive that supports **Two-Way Binding** and is added to the `<input>` element to enhance it's properties and to get the input.  
It gives access to the value entered by the user in the input, and also *allows you to write data back to the input*. That is what **Two-Way Binding** means (listen to input but also output data, both with one syntax i.e. `[(ngModel)] = propToBind`).   
Do not forget to import `FormsModule` from '@angular/forms';    
You can track each keystroke of the user when he/she is inputting any value (live).   
Inputs in HTML always yield a **string**.

### 56. Content Projection with ng-content

If you have a component and you want to tell angular that i will have some content in this, you can use the placeholder as like

```
card.component.html
<div>
  <ng-content>
</div>
```  
`<ng-content>` will act as a placeholder and it will be replaced by the markup wrapped by this component.

### 57. Transforming Template Data with Pipes

Pipes are *output transformers*. They transform the output in the templates to improve how data is displayed 

  <time>{{ task.dueDate | date:'fullDate'}}</time>

`:fullDate` is for the configuration purposes and you also need to import `*DatePipe*` from `'@angular/common'`.


### 58. Getting Started with Services

The idea behind services is make a class which holds the data and the opertaions to be done on that data by different components. so separating the data and the data operations from our components to make our code base leaner. 

### 59. Getting Started with Dependency Injection

The idea behind **dependency injection** is that you do not create the instance yourself. Instead, you tell Angular that you need such an instance, and Angular creates it. Angular can create this instance once, and you can use this single instance in different components, thus operating on the same data.

#### Using the Constructor for Dependency Injection   

How do we tell Angular that we want such an instance? We add a constructor function to the class, which is a special method executed automatically when the class is instantiated. Angular executes this constructor when it instantiates the component used in a template.

Commit message:

60. More Service Usage & Alternative Dependency Injection Mechanism

02-essentials/01-starting-project/notes.md, after:

# Angular Course

## Section 2 - Angular Essentials

### 17. Managing and Creating Components with Angular CLI

    ng generate component <componentname>

OR short-hand 

    ng g c <componentname 

Example: 

    ng g c user

the above command will generate a component under `app/user/user.component.ts` and similarly `.html` and `.css` and `.spec.ts` for the **automated testing** file

### 21. Outputting Dynamic Content with Interpolation 

String interpolation allows you to render the dynamic data. in Angular, you can render the property of a class in the markup using double curly braces '{{  }}' 

### 22. Property Binding 

String interpolation is typically used between tags like `<h1>{{ selectedUser.name }}</h1>` and not used for *attributes* e.g. `<img src="{{ selectedUser.avatar }}" >`. Although you can use that but there is an alternative called Property Binding.

To configure the property of the DOM element to bind, we wrap the name of the element in double square brackets '[]' and assign the value to that attribute 

    <img [src]="'assets/users/' + selectedUser.avatar">

we can do this 

    <img src="assets/users/{{ selectedUser.avatar }}" alt="{{ selectedUser.name }}"/>

but this is better

    <img [src]="'assets/users/' + selectedUser.avatar" [alt]="selectedUser.name" />


#### Difference between Interpolation and Property Binding

With interpolation, you can do only **string** or **integer** manipulation. It does not deal with values for example *boolean* values. 

Let's take an example: you have a property in the component class which it *disable = false*. now in input tag's attribute **disabled** you pass it as 

    <input disabled="{{ disable }}" /> // this will read it as string and it will be always true

with Property Binding 

    <input [disabled]=disable /> // this will read 'disable' as false

To change the attribute or property, always use the **Property Binding**. 

### 27. How Angular tracks and make the UI changes 

`Zone.js` is a JS library. After every event (user events and others) **zone.js** looks for the changes to be made and updates the UI. When an async task completes, zone.js notifies Angular to run change detection. This ensures the UI updates automatically when data changes. Without zone.js, developers would need to manually trigger change detection.

### 28. Introducing Signals 

Signals are advance method of change detection and UI updates. Signals are Trackable Data Containers.

A Signal is an object that stores a value. Angular manages subscriptions to the signal to get notified about value changes. When a change occurs, Angular is the able to update the part of the UI that needs updating. 

They contains values, and they notify angular when those values change so Angular can update those parts of the UI where these values are being used. 

Whenever you are dealing with any property that stores a signal, you have to execute the property as a function to get the latest value for it. you can not access it like {{ selectUser.name }} rather you have to {{ selectUser().name }}

By using Signal, Angular can implement UI change in a fine grained way. Angular can now just look at specific parts of the app for the UI changes, and not all the possible parts of the application where an event could occur.

**Zone.js** -> notifies Angular about user events, expired timers etc. 
**Singals** -> notify Angular about when a signal values changes. 

### 30. Defining Component Inputs - Making Components Reusable

You can pass the dynamic data to the component, for that define the property in the .ts file with decorator @Input which will be imported from core. And then access this property and set the value of this property with the component tag.

```
export class UserComponent {

    @Input() avatar!: string;
    @Input() name!: string;

    // the '!' with property name is to tell typescript that we are going to set the value of this property from outside and that we know we have not initialized this property with any value.

    // image path getter
    get imagePath() {
        return "assets/users/" + this.avatar;
    }

    // define a function that handles the event (the name of the function may start with 'on')
    onClickUser() { }

}
```

    <app-user [avatar]="users[1].avatar" [name]="users[1].name"/>


### 32. Using Signal Inputs 

```
import { Component, computed, Input, input} from '@angular/core';

@Component({
  selector: 'app-user',
  standalone: true,
  templateUrl: './user.component.html',
  styleUrl: './user.component.css'
})
export class UserComponent {

  // @Input({required: true}) avatar!: string;
  // @Input({required: true}) name!: string;

  // @Input is a decorator 
  // input() is a function

  // setting inputs with input()
  avatar = input.required(); 
  name = input.required(); 

  imagePath = computed(() => {
    return "assets/users/" + this.avatar();
  });
  
  // * we do not need exclamation with the propery name because technically the 'avatar' and 'name' now have initial values assigned to them which are these signal inputs and since the signals are data container they internally hold some value and those internal values will be the actual input values

  // * name and avatar now has become signals and in component we now access these inputs as 'name()' and not 'name'

  // * these input signals are read only, which means that the value of these inputs will only change when the value is given from the component markup. and you can not set the value of these inputs inside the components class where inputs are registered i.e. in .ts file. 
  // * Reason ? since with signals, angular manages subscriptions and track changes and updates UI. so the signal has to be changed from the outside and it will not be efficient if it can be changed from anywhere

  // - avatar = input(); // define an input 
  // - avatar = input(''); // you can pass any initial value to the input 
  // - avatar = input<string>(); // you can define the type of the input 
  // - avatar = input.required(); // you can make it required but then you can not assign any initial value to the input and it has to be passed to the component as attribute
  // - avatar = input.required<string>(); 

  // image path getter
  // get imagePath() {
  //   return "assets/users/" + this.avatar;
  // }

  // define a function that handles the event (the name of the function may start with 'on')
  onClickUser() {
    this.avatar = 'one';
   }

}

```

Majority of the projects does not use signals yet. they mostly use @Input


### 41. Outputting List Content Dynamically in Angular

    <ul id="users">
        @for (user of users; track user.id){
        <li>
            <app-user
            [user]="user"
            (select)="onSelectUser($event)"
            />
        </li>
        }
    </ul>

The reason behind the `track user.id` is that the Angular wants to assign something unique to each element of the list, and the other thing is because of efficiency. For example, if there is change in list of items, the Angular won't have to generate the whole list again and again. So, that's the idea behind the track use.id 

### 43. Legacy Angular: Using ngFor & ngIf

``` 
Newer version:

<ul id="users">
    @for (user of users; track user.id){
      <li>
        <app-user
          [user]="user"
          (select)="onSelectUser($event)"
        />
      </li>
    }
  </ul>
```

```
Legacy with *ngFor:

<ul id="users">
      <li *ngFor="let user of users">
        <app-user
          [user]="user"
          (select)="onSelectUser($event)"
        />
      </li>
  </ul>
```

`*ngFor` is type of **Structual Directive** which is an enhancement that is added to elements to change those elements or change the DOM where those elements are used.

And now for `@if` is `ngIf`

```
Newer version:
@if(getSelectedUser){
    <app-tasks [name]="getSelectedUser.name" />
  } @else {
    <p id="fallback">Ssssssssssss</p>
  }
```

```
Legacy:
<app-tasks *ngIf="selectedUser; else anyfallback" [name]="selectedUser.name" />

<!--- this is else case --->
    <ng-template #anyfallback>
      <p id="fallback">Ssssssssssss</p>
    </ng-template>
```
`else` case is a bit complex.

Note: Make sure to import the NgFor and NgIf in .ts file


### 43. More Component Communication: Deleting Tasks

Flow of event, in `task.html` file, listen for the click event on the complete button, link a function `onCompleteTask()` to this click event and in this function, emit an output event. Then in the `tasks.html` file, listen for this new event and link that event to a function in `tasks.ts` file.

### 52. Using Directives & Two-Way-Binding

`[(ngModel)]` is a directive that supports **Two-Way Binding** and is added to the `<input>` element to enhance it's properties and to get the input.  
It gives access to the value entered by the user in the input, and also *allows you to write data back to the input*. That is what **Two-Way Binding** means (listen to input but also output data, both with one syntax i.e. `[(ngModel)] = propToBind`).   
Do not forget to import `FormsModule` from '@angular/forms';    
You can track each keystroke of the user when he/she is inputting any value (live).   
Inputs in HTML always yield a **string**.

### 56. Content Projection with ng-content

If you have a component and you want to tell angular that i will have some content in this, you can use the placeholder as like

```
card.component.html
<div>
  <ng-content>
</div>
```  
`<ng-content>` will act as a placeholder and it will be replaced by the markup wrapped by this component.

### 57. Transforming Template Data with Pipes

Pipes are *output transformers*. They transform the output in the templates to improve how data is displayed 

  <time>{{ task.dueDate | date:'fullDate'}}</time>

`:fullDate` is for the configuration purposes and you also need to import `*DatePipe*` from `'@angular/common'`.


### 58. Getting Started with Services

The idea behind services is make a class which holds the data and the opertaions to be done on that data by different components. so separating the data and the data operations from our components to make our code base leaner. 

### 59. Getting Started with Dependency Injection

The idea behind **dependency injection** is that you do not create the instance yourself. Instead, you tell Angular that you need such an instance, and Angular creates it. Angular can create this instance once, and you can use this single instance in different components, thus operating on the same data.

#### Using the Constructor for Dependency Injection   

How do we tell Angular that we want such an instance? We add a constructor function to the class, which is a special method executed automatically when the class is instantiated. Angular executes this constructor when it instantiates the component used in a template.

### 60. More Service Usage & Alternative Dependency Injection Mechanism

- Approach 1 - Constructor method    
```
constructor(private tasksService: TasksService){}
```

- Approach 2 - inject() method  
*// inject a dependency and initiate an instance with inject() and not the constructor approach*
```
private tasksService = inject(TasksService);
```
